Chat template docs (#36163)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/chat_template_multimodal.md

the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

⚠️ Note that this file is in Markdown but contain specific syntax for our doc-builder (similar to MDX) that may not be
rendered properly in your Markdown viewer.

-->

# Multimodal Chat Templates for Vision and Audio LLMs

In this section, we'll explore how to use chat templates with multimodal models, enabling your templates to handle a variety of inputs such as text, images, and audio. Multimodal models provide richer, more interactive experiences, and understanding how to effectively combine these inputs within your templates is key. We’ll walk through how to work with different modalities, configure your templates for optimal performance, and tackle common challenges along the way.

> Just like with text-only LLMs, multimodal models expect a chat with **messages** each of which includes a **role** and **content**. However for multimodal models chat templates are a part of the [Processor](./main_cllasses/processors). Let's see how we can format our prompts when there are images or videos in the input along with text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like with text-only LLMs, multimodal models expect a chat with **messages**, each of which includes a **role** and **content**. However, for multimodal models, chat templates are a part of the [Processor](./main_cllasses/processors) class. Let's see how we can format our prompts when there are images or videos in the input along with text.
```

> ## How to use chat templates with image inputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Image inputs
```

> For models such as [LLaVA](https://huggingface.co/llava-hf) the prompts can be formatted as below. Notice that the only difference from text-only models is that we need to pass as well a placeholder for input images. TO accomodate for extra modalities, each **content** will be a list containing either a text or an image **type**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For models such as [LLaVA](https://huggingface.co/llava-hf) the prompts can be formatted as below. Notice that the only difference from text-only models is that we need to also pass a placeholder for input images. To accommodate for extra modalities, each **content** is a list containing either a text or an image **type**.
```

Let's make this concrete with a quick example using the `llava-hf/llava-onevision-qwen2-0.5b-ov-hf` model:

```python
from transformers import AutoProcessor, LlavaOnevisionForConditionalGeneration

model_id = "llava-hf/llava-onevision-qwen2-0.5b-ov-hf"
processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained(model_id)

messages = [
    {
        "role": "system",
        "content": [{"type": "text", "text": "You are a friendly chatbot who always responds in the style of a pirate"}],
    },
    {
      "role": "user",
      "content": [
            {"type": "image"},
            {"type": "text", "text": "What are these?"},
        ],
    },
]

formatted_prompt = processor.apply_chat_template(messages, add_generation_prompt=True, tokenize=False)
print(formatted_prompt)
```

This yields a string in LLaVA's expected input format with many `<image>` tokens prepended before the text.
```text
'<|im_start|>system 
<|im_start|>system 
You are a friendly chatbot who always responds in the style of a pirate<|im_end|><|im_start|>user <image>
What are these?<|im_end|>
```

> ### Passing Images as Paths or URLs for Seamless Integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Image paths or URLs
```

To incorporate images into your chat templates, you can pass them as file paths or URLs. This method automatically loads the image, processes it, and prepares the necessary pixel values to create ready-to-use inputs for the model. This approach simplifies the integration of images, enabling seamless multimodal functionality.

> Let's see how it works with an example using the same model as above. This time we'll indicate an image URL with `"url"` key in the message's **content** and ask the chat template to `tokenize` and `return_dict`. Currently the following sources are supported to load images: "base64", "url", and "path .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see how it works with an example using the same model as above. This time we'll indicate an image URL with `"url"` key in the message's **content** and ask the chat template to `tokenize` and `return_dict`. Currently, "base64", "url", and "path" are supported image sources.
```

```python
from transformers import AutoProcessor, LlavaOnevisionForConditionalGeneration

model_id = "llava-hf/llava-onevision-qwen2-0.5b-ov-hf"
model = LlavaOnevisionForConditionalGeneration.from_pretrained(model_id)
processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained(model_id)

messages = [
    {
        "role": "system",
        "content": [{"type": "text", "text": "You are a friendly chatbot who always responds in the style of a pirate"}],
    },
    {
      "role": "user",
      "content": [
            {"type": "image", "url": "http://images.cocodataset.org/val2017/000000039769.jpg"},
            {"type": "text", "text": "What are these?"},
        ],
    },
]

processed_chat = processor.apply_chat_template(messages, add_generation_prompt=True, tokenize=True, return_dict=True, return_tensors="pt")
print(processed_chat.keys())
```

This yields a dictionary with inputs processed and ready to be further passed into [`~GenerationMixin.generate`] to generate text.
```text
dict_keys(["input_ids", "attention_mask", "pixel_values", "image_sizes"])
```

> ## How to use chat templates with video inputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Video inputs
```

Using the above model, we need to apply chat template as follows to sample 2 frames per second.

```python
processed_chat = processor.apply_chat_template(
    messages,
    add_generation_prompt=True,
    tokenize=True,
    return_dict=True,
    video_fps=32,
    video_load_backend="decord",
)
print(processed_chat.keys())
```

### Custom Frame Sampling with a Function  

Not all models sample frames **uniformly** — some require more complex logic to determine which frames to use. If your model follows a different sampling strategy, you can **customize** frame selection by providing a function:  

🔹 Use the `sample_indices_fn` argument to pass a **callable function** for sampling.  
🔹 If provided, this function **overrides** standard `num_frames` and `fps` methods.  
🔹 It receives all the arguments passed to `load_video` and must return **valid frame indices** to sample.  

> When to Use `sample_indices_fn`?  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should use `sample_indices_fn` when:
```

- If you need a custom sampling strategy (e.g., **adaptive frame selection** instead of uniform sampling).  
- If your model prioritizes **key moments** in a video rather than evenly spaced frames.  

Here’s an example of how to implement it:  

```python

def sample_indices_fn(metadata, **kwargs):
    # samples only the first and the second frame
    return [0, 1]

processed_chat = processor.apply_chat_template(
    messages,
    add_generation_prompt=True,
    tokenize=True,
    return_dict=True,
    sample_indices_fn=sample_indices_fn,
    video_load_backend="decord",
)
print(processed_chat.keys())
```

By using `sample_indices_fn`, you gain **full control** over frame selection, making your model **more adaptable** to different video scenarios. 🚀  

> ### Using a List of Image Frames as a Video

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### List of image frames as video
```

> Sometimes, instead of having a full video file, you might only have a set of sampled frames stored as images. No worries—we've got you covered!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, instead of having a full video file, you might only have a set of sampled frames stored as images.
```

You can pass a list of image file paths, and the processor will automatically concatenate them into a video. Just make sure that all images have the same size, as they are assumed to be from the same video.

> ```python
> 
> frames_paths = ["/path/to/frame0.png", "/path/to/frame5.png", "/path/to/frame10.png"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
frames_paths = ["/path/to/frame0.png", "/path/to/frame5.png", "/path/to/frame10.png"]
```

messages = [
    {
        "role": "system",
        "content": [{"type": "text", "text": "You are a friendly chatbot who always responds in the style of a pirate"}],
    },
    {
      "role": "user",
      "content": [
            {"type": "video", "path": frames_paths},
            {"type": "text", "text": "What do you see in this video?"},
        ],
    },
]

processed_chat = processor.apply_chat_template(
    messages,
    add_generation_prompt=True,
    tokenize=True,
    return_dict=True,
)
print(processed_chat.keys())
```

## How to use chat templates with audio inputs

> To be supported soon. Stay tuned! 🤗 

Reviewer: I think we can remove this for now since it doesn't add anything at the moment

> ## Is there also a pipeline for multimodal conversations?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Multimodal conversational pipeline
```

> Yes, similarly to text generation pipeline we support an [`ImageTextToTextPipeline`]. Currently it accepts only images as inputs but we are planning to add support for video inputs in the future. The pipeline supports chat inputs in the same format as we have seen above. Apart from that the pipeline will accept chats in OpenAI format. However note, that OpenAI format in supported exclusively within the pipeline to make inference easier and more accessible. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`ImageTextToTextPipeline`] currently accepts images as inputs but we are planning to add support for video inputs in the future. The pipeline supports chat inputs in the same format as we have seen above. Apart from that, the pipeline will accept chats in OpenAI format. This format is supported exclusively within the pipeline to make inference easier and more accessible. 
```

> Here is how OpenAI conversation format looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is how the OpenAI conversation format looks:
```
